25. Contributing to FreeNAS^®
*****************************

FreeNAS^® is an open source community, relying on the input and
expertise of users to grow and improve. When users take time to assist
the community, their contributions benefit everyone.

This section describes how to participate and contribute to FreeNAS^®.
It is by no means an exhaustive list. If you have an idea that will
benefit the community, bring it up on one of the resources mentioned
in Support Resources.

This section demonstrates how to:

* Help with Translation


25.1. Translation
=================

FreeNAS^® is developed and documented in English. Having complete
translations of the user interface into other languages helps make
FreeNAS^® much more useful to communities around the world.

FreeNAS^® uses ".po" files stored in the webui GitHub repository to
manage the translation of text shown in the FreeNAS^® graphical
administrative interface. GitHub provides an easy to use web-based
editor, making it possible for individuals to assist with translation
or comment on existing translations.

To view translation files, open the "/src/assets/i18n" directory of
the FreeNAS^® webui repository, as shown in Figure %s.

   [image]FreeNAS^® Translation Files

To assist with translating FreeNAS^®, first create an account with
GitHub and Fork the freenas/webui repository.

There are two methods for committing translations:

1. Use the GitHub website to edit the ".po" files.

OR

2. Make a local copy of the forked repository and use a text editor
   for translations.


25.1.1. Translate with GitHub
-----------------------------

Open a browser and go to your GitHub profile. Select the Repositories
tab and open your fork of the "freenas/webui" repository. Click src ‣
assets ‣ i18n to open the translations directory. Click on the desired
language ".po" file to begin translating.

Tip:

  Here is a list of common language abbreviations

Click the Pencil icon in the upper right area to open the online file
editor. Figure %s shows the page that appears:

   [image]GitHub Online Editor

There are numerous "msgid """ and "msgstr """ entries in the file.
Read  the "msgid" text and enter the translation between the "msgstr"
quotes.

Scroll to the bottom of the page when finished entering translations.
Enter a descriptive title and summary of changes for the edits and
click Commit changes.


25.1.2. Download and Translate Offline
--------------------------------------

Install Git. There are numerous examples in these instructions of
using **git**, but full documentation for **git** is available online.

These instructions show using the Command Line Interface (CLI) with
**git**, but many graphical utilities are available.

Create a suitable directory to store the local copy of the forked
repository. Download the repository with **git clone**:

"% git clone https://github.com/ghuser/webui.git"

The download can take several minutes, depending on connection speed.

Use **cd** to go to the "i18n" directory:

"% cd src/assets/i18n/"

Use a "po" editor to add translations to the desired language file.
Any capable editor will work, but poedit and gtranslator are two
common options.

Commit any file changes with **git commit**:

"% git commit ar.po"

Enter a descriptive message about the changes and save the commit.

When finished making commits to the branch, use **git push** to send
your changes to the online fork repository.


25.1.3. Translation Pull Requests
---------------------------------

When ready to merge translations in the original "freenas/webui"
repository, open a web browser and go to your forked repository on
GitHub. Select the Code tab and click New pull request. Set the base
repository drop-down to "freenas/webui" and the head repository to
your fork. Click Create pull request, write a title and summary of
your proposed changes, and click Create pull request again to submit
your translations to the "freenas/webui" repository.

The FreeNAS^® project automatically tests pull requests for
compatibility. If there any issues with a pull request, either the
automated system will update the request or a FreeNAS^® team member
will leave a message in the comment section of the request.

All assistance with translations helps to benefit the FreeNAS^®
community. Thank you!
