2. Installing and Upgrading
***************************

The FreeNAS^® operating system has to be installed on a separate
device from the drives which hold the storage data. With only one disk
drive, the FreeNAS^® web interface is available, but there is no place
to store any data. And storing data is, after all, the whole point of
a NAS system. Home users experimenting with FreeNAS^® can install
FreeNAS^® on an inexpensive USB stick and use the computer disks for
storage.

This section describes:

* Getting FreeNAS®

* Preparing the Media

* Performing the Installation

* Installation Troubleshooting

* Upgrading

* Virtualization


2.1. Getting FreeNAS^®
======================

The latest STABLE version of FreeNAS^® 11.3 is available for download
from https://www.freenas.org/download-freenas-release/.

The download page has links to FreeNAS^® release notes, ".iso"
integrity checksums, and PGP security keys.

Clicking Download opens a dialog to save an *.iso* file. This bootable
installer must be written to physical media before it can be used to
install FreeNAS^®.


2.1.1. Checking Installer Integrity
-----------------------------------

FreeNAS^® uses the OpenPGP standard to confirm that downloaded files
have been provided by a trustworthy source. OpenPGP compliant software
like gnupg, Kleopatra, or Gpg4win can check the PGP signature of a
FreeNAS^® installer file.

The "sha256.txt" file is used to confirm the integrity of the
downloaded ".iso". See SHA256 Verification for more details.


2.1.1.1. PGP Verification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To verify the ".iso" source, go to https://www.freenas.org/download-
freenas-release/ and click PGP Signature to download the software
signature file. Open the PGP Public key link and note the browser
address and "Search results" string.

Use one of the OpenPGP encryption tools mentioned above to import the
public key and verify the PGP signature.

This example shows verifying the FreeNAS^® ".iso" using **gpg** in a
command prompt:

* Go to the ".iso" and ".iso.gpg" download location and import the
  public key using the keyserver address and search results string:

   tmoore@Observer ~> cd Downloads/
   tmoore@Observer ~/Downloads> gpg --keyserver sks-keyservers.net --recv-keys 0xc8d62def767c1db0dff4e6ec358eaa9112cf7946
   gpg: /usr/home/tmoore/.gnupg/trustdb.gpg: trustdb created
   gpg: key 358EAA9112CF7946: public key "IX SecTeam <security-officer@ixsystems.com>" imported
   gpg: Total number processed: 1
   gpg:               imported: 1
   tmoore@Observer ~/Downloads>

* Use **gpg --verify** to compare the ".iso" and ".iso.gpg" files:

   tmoore@Observer ~/Downloads> gpg --verify FreeNAS-11.2-U6.iso.gpg FreeNAS-11.2-U6.iso
   gpg: Signature made Tue Nov  5 13:48:18 2019 EST
   gpg:                using RSA key C8D62DEF767C1DB0DFF4E6EC358EAA9112CF7946
   gpg: Good signature from "IX SecTeam <security-officer@ixsystems.com>" [unknown]
   gpg: WARNING: This key is not certified with a trusted signature!
   gpg:          There is no indication that the signature belongs to the owner.
   Primary key fingerprint: C8D6 2DEF 767C 1DB0 DFF4  E6EC 358E AA91 12CF 7946
   tmoore@Observer ~/Downloads>

* This response means the signature is correct but still untrusted. Go
  back to the browser page that has the PGP Public key open and
  manually confirm that the key was issued for the iX Security Team on
  October 15, 2019 and has been signed by iXsystems accounts.


2.1.1.2. SHA256 Verification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The command to verify the checksum varies by operating system:

* on a BSD system use the command "sha256 *isofile*"

* on a Linux system use the command "sha256sum *isofile*"

* on a Mac system use the command "shasum -a 256 *isofile*"

* Windows or Mac users can install additional utilities like HashCalc
  or HashTab.

The value produced by running the command must match the value shown
in the "sha256.txt" file. Different checksum values indicate a
corrupted installer file that should not be used.


2.2. Preparing the Media
========================

The FreeNAS^® installer can run from either a CD or a USB stick.

A CD burning utility is needed to write the ".iso" file to a CD.

The ".iso" file can also be written to a USB stick. The method used to
write the file depends on the operating system. Examples for several
common operating systems are shown below.

Note:

  To install from a USB stick to another USB stick, **two** USB ports
  are needed, each with an inserted USB device. One USB stick contains
  the installer.  The other USB stick is the destination for the
  FreeNAS^® installation. Take care to select the correct USB device
  for the FreeNAS^® installation. It is **not** possible to install
  FreeNAS^® onto the same USB stick containing the installer. After
  installation, remove the installer USB stick. It might also be
  necessary to adjust the BIOS configuration to boot from the new
  FreeNAS^® USB stick.

Ensure the operating system device order in the BIOS is set to boot
from the device containing the FreeNAS^® installer media, then boot
the system to start the installation.


2.2.1. On FreeBSD or Linux
--------------------------

On a FreeBSD or Linux system, the **dd** command is used to write the
".iso" file to an inserted USB stick.

Warning:

  The **dd** command is very powerful and can destroy any existing
  data on the specified device. Make **absolutely sure** of the device
  name to write to and do not mistype the device name when using
  **dd**! This command can be avoided by writing the ".iso" file to a
  CD instead.

This example demonstrates writing the image to the first USB device
connected to a FreeBSD system. This first device usually reports as
*/dev/da0*. Replace "*FreeNAS-RELEASE.iso*" with the filename of the
downloaded FreeNAS^® ISO file. Replace "*/dev/da0*" with the device
name of the device to write.

   dd if=FreeNAS-RELEASE.iso of=/dev/da0 bs=64k
   6117+0 records in
   6117+0 records out
   400883712 bytes transferred in 88.706398 secs (4519220 bytes/sec)

When using the **dd** command:

* **if=** refers to the input file, or the name of the file to write
  to the device.

* **of=** refers to the output file; in this case, the device name of
  the flash card or removable USB stick. Note that USB device numbers
  are dynamic, and the target device might be *da1* or *da2* or
  another name depending on which devices are attached. Before
  attaching the target USB stick, use **ls /dev/da***.  Then attach
  the target USB stick, wait ten seconds, and run **ls /dev/da***
  again to see the new device name and number of the target USB stick.
  On Linux, use "/dev/sd*X*", where *X* refers to the letter of the
  USB device.

* **bs=** refers to the block size, the amount of data to write at a
  time. The larger 64K block size shown here helps speed up writes to
  the USB stick.


2.2.2. On Windows
-----------------

Image Writer and Rufus can be used for writing images to USB sticks on
Windows.


2.2.3. On macOS
---------------

Insert the USB stick. In Finder, go to Applications ‣ Utilities ‣ Disk
Utility. Unmount any mounted partitions on the USB stick. Check that
the USB stick has only one partition, or partition table errors will
be shown on boot. If needed, use Disk Utility to set up one partition
on the USB stick. Selecting Free space when creating the partition
works fine.

Determine the device name of the inserted USB stick. From TERMINAL,
navigate to the Desktop, then type this command:

   diskutil list
   /dev/disk0

   #:     TYPE NAME               SIZE            IDENTIFIER
   0:     GUID_partition_scheme   *500.1 GB       disk0
   1:     EFI                     209.7 MB        disk0s1
   2:     Apple_HFS Macintosh HD  499.2 GB        disk0s2
   3:     Apple_Boot Recovery HD  650.0 MB        disk0s3

   /dev/disk1
   #:     TYPE NAME               SIZE            IDENTIFIER
   0:     FDisk_partition_scheme  *8.0 GB         disk1
   1:     DOS_FAT_32 UNTITLED     8.0 GB          disk1s1

This shows which devices are available to the system. Locate the
target USB stick and record the path. To determine the correct path
for the USB stick, remove the device, run the command again, and
compare the difference. Once sure of the device name, navigate to the
Desktop from TERMINAL, unmount the USB stick, and use the **dd**
command to write the image to the USB stick. In this example, the USB
stick is "/dev/disk1". It is first unmounted. The **dd** command is
used to write the image to the faster "raw" version of the device
(note the extra "r" in "/dev/rdisk1").

When running these commands, replace "*FreeNAS-RELEASE.iso*" with the
name of the FreeNAS^® ISO and "*/dev/rdisk1*" with the correct path to
the USB stick:

   diskutil unmountDisk /dev/disk1
   Unmount of all volumes on disk1 was successful

   dd if=FreeNAS-RELEASE.iso of=/dev/rdisk1 bs=64k

Note:

  If the error "Resource busy" is shown when the **dd** command is
  run, go to Applications ‣ Utilities ‣ Disk Utility, find the USB
  stick, and click on its partitions to make sure all of them are
  unmounted. If a "Permission denied" error is shown, use **sudo** for
  elevated rights: "sudo dd if=*FreeNAS-11.0-RELEASE.iso*
  of=*/dev/rdisk1* bs=64k". This will prompt for the password.

The **dd** command can take some minutes to complete. Wait until the
prompt returns and a message is displayed with information about how
long it took to write the image to the USB stick.


2.3. Performing the Installation
================================

With the installation media inserted, boot the system from that media.

The FreeNAS^® installer boot menu is displayed as is shown in Figure
%s.

   [image]Installer Boot Menu

The FreeNAS^® installer automatically boots into the default option
after ten seconds. If needed, choose another boot option by pressing
the "Spacebar" to stop the timer and then enter the number of the
desired option.

Tip:

  The Serial Console option is useful on systems which do not have a
  keyboard or monitor, but are accessed through a serial port, *Serial
  over LAN*, or IPMI.

Note:

  If the installer does not boot, verify that the installation device
  is listed first in the boot order in the BIOS. When booting from a
  CD, some motherboards may require connecting the CD device to SATA0
  (the first connector) to boot from CD. If the installer stalls
  during bootup, double-check the SHA256 hash of the ".iso" file. If
  the hash does not match, re-download the file. If the hash is
  correct, burn the CD again at a lower speed or write the file to a
  different USB stick.

Once the installer has finished booting, the installer menu is
displayed as shown in Figure %s.

   [image]Installer Menu

Press "Enter" to select the default option, 1 Install/Upgrade. The
next menu, shown in Figure %s, lists all available drives. This
includes any inserted operating system devices, which have names
beginning with *da*.

Note:

  A minimum of 8 GiB of RAM is required and the installer will present
  a warning message if less than 8 GiB is detected.

In this example, the user is performing a test installation using
VirtualBox and has created a 16 GiB virtual disk to hold the operating
system.

   [image]Selecting the Install Drive

Use the arrow keys to highlight the destination SSD, hard drive, USB
stick, or virtual disk. Press the "spacebar" to select it.

To mirror the operating system device, move to additional devices and
press "spacebar" to select them also. If all of the selected devices
are larger than 64 GiB and none are connected through USB, a 16 GiB
swap partition is also created.

After making selections, press "Enter". The warning shown in Figure %s
is displayed, a reminder not to install the operating system on a
drive that is meant for storage. Press "Enter" to continue on to the
screen shown in Figure %s.

   [image]Installation Warning

See the operating system device section to ensure the minimum
requirements are met.

The installer recognizes existing installations of previous versions
of FreeNAS^®. When an existing installation is present, the menu shown
in Figure %s is displayed.  To overwrite an existing installation, use
the arrows to move to Fresh Install and press "Enter" twice to
continue to the screen shown in Figure %s.

   [image]Performing a Fresh Install

The screen shown in Figure %s prompts for the *root* password which is
used to log in to the web interface.

   [image]Set the Root Password

Setting a password is mandatory and the password cannot be blank.
Since this password provides access to the web interface, it needs to
be hard to guess. Enter the password, press the down arrow key, and
confirm the password. Then press "Enter" to continue with the
installation. Choosing Cancel skips setting a root password during the
installation, but the web interface will require setting a root
password when logging in for the first time.

Note:

  For security reasons, the SSH service and *root* SSH logins are
  disabled by default. Unless these are set, the only way to access a
  shell as *root* is to gain physical access to the console menu or to
  access the web shell within the web interface. This means that the
  FreeNAS^® system needs to be kept physically secure and that the web
  interface needs to be behind a properly configured firewall and
  protected by a secure password.

FreeNAS^® can be configured to boot with the standard BIOS boot
mechanism or UEFI booting as shown Figure %s. BIOS booting is
recommended for legacy and enterprise hardware. UEFI is used on newer
consumer motherboards.

   [image]Choose UEFI or BIOS Booting

Note:

  Most UEFI systems can also boot in BIOS mode if CSM (Compatibility
  Support Module) is enabled in the UEFI setup screens.

The message in Figure %s is shown after the installation is complete.

   [image]Installation Complete

Press "Enter" to return to Installer Menu. Highlight 3 Reboot System
and press "Enter". If booting from CD, remove the CDROM. As the system
reboots, make sure that the device where FreeNAS^® was installed is
listed as the first boot entry in the BIOS so the system will boot
from it.

FreeNAS^® boots into the Console Setup menu described in Booting after
waiting five seconds in the boot menu. Press the "Spacebar" to stop
the timer and use the boot menu.


2.4. Installation Troubleshooting
=================================

If the system does not boot into FreeNAS^®, there are several things
that can be checked to resolve the situation.

Check the system BIOS and see if there is an option to change the USB
emulation from CD/DVD/floppy to hard drive. If it still will not boot,
check to see if the card/drive is UDMA compliant.

If the system BIOS does not support EFI with BIOS emulation, see if it
has an option to boot using legacy BIOS mode.

When the system starts to boot but hangs with this repeated error
message:

   run_interrupt_driven_hooks: still waiting after 60 seconds for xpt_config

go into the system BIOS and look for an onboard device configuration
for a 1394 Controller. If present, disable that device and try booting
again.

If the system starts to boot but hangs at a *mountroot>* prompt,
follow the instructions in Workaround/Semi-Fix for Mountroot Issues
with 9.3.

If the burned image fails to boot and the image was burned using a
Windows system, wipe the USB stick before trying a second burn using a
utility such as Active@ KillDisk. Otherwise, the second burn attempt
will fail as Windows does not understand the partition which was
written from the image file. Be very careful to specify the correct
USB stick when using a wipe utility!


2.5. Upgrading
==============

FreeNAS^® provides flexibility for keeping the operating system up-to-
date:

1. Upgrades to major releases, for example from version 9.3 to 9.10,
   can still be performed using either an ISO or the web interface.
   Unless the Release Notes for the new major release indicate that
   the current version requires an ISO upgrade, either upgrade method
   can be used.

2. Minor releases have been replaced with signed updates. This means
   that it is not necessary to wait for a minor release to update the
   system with a system update or newer versions of drivers and
   features.  It is also no longer necessary to manually download an
   upgrade file and its associated checksum to update the system.

3. The updater automatically creates a boot environment, making
   updates a low-risk operation. Boot environments provide the option
   to return to the previous version of the operating system by
   rebooting the system and selecting the previous boot environment
   from the boot menu.

This section describes how to perform an upgrade from an earlier
version of FreeNAS^® to 11.3. After 11.3 has been installed, use the
instructions in Update to keep the system updated.


2.5.1. Caveats
--------------

Be aware of these caveats **before** attempting an upgrade to 11.3:

* **Warning: upgrading the ZFS pool can make it impossible to go back
  to a previous version.** For this reason, the update process does
  not automatically upgrade the ZFS pool, though the Alert system
  shows when newer ZFS Feature Flags are available for a pool. Unless
  a new feature flag is needed, it is safe to leave the pool at the
  current version and uncheck the alert. If the pool is upgraded, it
  will not be possible to boot into a previous version that does not
  support the newer feature flags.

* Upgrading the firmware of Broadcom SAS HBAs to the latest version is
  recommended.

* If upgrading from 9.3.x, read the FAQ: Updating from 9.3 to 9.10
  first.

* **Upgrades from** FreeNAS^® **0.7x are not supported.** The system
  has no way to import configuration settings from 0.7x versions of
  FreeNAS^®. The configuration must be manually recreated.  If
  supported, the FreeNAS^® 0.7x pools or disks must be manually
  imported.

* **Upgrades on 32-bit hardware are not supported.** However, if the
  system is currently running a 32-bit version of FreeNAS^® **and**
  the hardware supports 64-bit, the system can be upgraded.  Any
  archived reporting graphs will be lost during the upgrade.

* **UFS is not supported.** If the data currently resides on **one**
  UFS-formatted disk, create a ZFS pool using **other** disks after
  the upgrade, then use the instructions in Importing a Disk to moun t
  the UFS-formatted disk and copy the data to the ZFS pool. With only
  one disk, back up its data to another system or media before the
  upgrade, format the disk as ZFS after the upgrade, then restore the
  backup. If the data currently resides on a UFS RAID of disks, it is
  not possible to directly import that data to the ZFS pool. Instead,
  back up the data before the upgrade, create a ZFS pool after the
  upgrade, then restore the data from the backup.


2.5.2. Initial Preparation
--------------------------

Before upgrading the operating system, perform the following steps:

1. **Back up the** FreeNAS^® **configuration** in System ‣ General ‣
   Save Config.

2. If any pools are encrypted, **remember** to set a passphrase and
   download a copy of the encryption key and the latest recovery key.
   After the upgrade is complete, use the instructions in Importing a
   Pool to import the encrypted pools.

3. Warn users that the FreeNAS^® shares will be unavailable during the
   upgrade; it is recommended to schedule the upgrade for a time that
   will least impact users.

4. Stop all services in Services.


2.5.3. Upgrading Using the ISO
------------------------------

To perform an upgrade using this method, download the ".iso" to the
computer that will be used to prepare the installation media. Burn the
downloaded ".iso" file to a CD or USB stick using the instructions in
Preparing the Media.

Insert the prepared media into the system and boot from it. The
installer waits ten seconds in the installer boot menu before booting
the default option. If needed, press the "Spacebar" to stop the timer
and choose another boot option. After the media finishes booting into
the installation menu, press "Enter" to select the default option of 1
Install/Upgrade. The installer presents a screen showing all available
drives.

Warning:

  *All* drives are shown, including boot drives and storage drives.
  Only choose boot drives when upgrading. Choosing the wrong drives to
  upgrade or install will cause loss of data. If unsure about which
  drives contain the FreeNAS^® operating system, reboot and remove the
  install media. In the FreeNAS^® web interface, use System ‣ Boot to
  identify the boot drives. More than one drive is shown when a mirror
  has been used.

Move to the drive where FreeNAS^® is installed and press the
"Spacebar" to mark it with a star. If a mirror has been used for the
operating system, mark all of the drives where the FreeNAS^® operating
system is installed. Press "Enter" when done.

The installer recognizes earlier versions of FreeNAS^® installed on
the boot drive or drives and presents the message shown in Figure %s.

   [image]Upgrading a FreeNAS^® Installation

To perform an upgrade, press "Enter" to accept the default of Upgrade
Install. Again, the installer will display a reminder that the
operating system should be installed on a disk that is not used for
storage.

   [image]Install in New Boot Environment or Format

The updated system can be installed in a new boot environment, or the
entire operating system device can be formatted to start fresh.
Installing into a new boot environment preserves the old code,
allowing a roll-back to previous versions if necessary. Formatting the
boot device is usually not necessary but can reclaim space. User data
and settings are preserved when installing to a new boot environment
and also when formatting the operating system device. Move the
highlight to one of the options and press "Enter" to start the
upgrade.

The installer unpacks the new image and displays the menu shown in
Figure %s. The database file that is preserved and migrated contains
your FreeNAS^® configuration settings.

   [image]Preserve and Migrate Settings

Press "Enter". FreeNAS^® indicates that the upgrade is complete and a
reboot is required. Press OK, highlight 3 Reboot System, then press
"Enter" to reboot the system. If the upgrade installer was booted from
CD, remove the CD.

During the reboot there can be a conversion of the previous
configuration database to the new version of the database. This
happens during the "Applying database schema changes" line in the
reboot cycle. This conversion can take a long time to finish,
sometimes fifteen minutes or more, and can cause the system to reboot
again. The system will start normally afterwards. If database errors
are shown but the web interface is accessible, go to Settings ‣
General and use the UPLOAD CONFIG button to upload the configuration
that was saved before starting the upgrade.


2.5.4. Upgrading From the Web Interface
---------------------------------------

To perform an upgrade using this method, go to System ‣ Update. See
Update for more information on upgrading the system.

The connection is lost temporarily when the update is complete. It
returns after the FreeNAS^® system reboots into the new version of the
operating system. The FreeNAS^® system normally receives the same IP
address from the DHCP server. Refresh the browser after a moment to
see if the system is accessible.


2.5.5. If Something Goes Wrong
------------------------------

If an update fails, an alert is issued and the details are written to
"/data/update.failed".

To return to a previous version of the operating system, physical or
IPMI access to the FreeNAS^® console is needed. Reboot the system and
watch for the boot menu:

   [image]Boot Menu

FreeNAS^® waits five seconds before booting into the default boot
environment. Press the "Spacebar" to stop the automatic boot timer.
Press "4" to display the available boot environments and press "3" as
needed to scroll through multiple pages.

   [image]Boot Environments

In the example shown in Figure %s, the first entry in Boot
Environments is "11.2-MASTER-201807250900". This is the current
version of the operating system, after the update was applied. Since
it is the first entry, it is the default selection.

The next entry is "Initial-Install". This is the original boot
environment created when FreeNAS^® was first installed. Since there
are no other entries between the initial installation and the first
entry, only one update has been applied to this system since its
initial installation.

To boot into another version of the operating system, enter the number
of the boot environment to set it as Active. Press "Backspace" to
return to the Boot Menu and press "Enter" to boot into the chosen
Active boot environment.

If an operating system device fails and the system no longer boots,
don't panic. The data is still on the disks and there is still a copy
of the saved configuration. The system can be recovered with a few
steps:

1. Perform a fresh installation on a new operating system device.

2. Import the pools in Storage ‣ Auto Import Pool.

3. Restore the configuration in System ‣ General ‣ Upload Config.

Note:

  It is not possible to restore a saved configuration that is newer
  than the installed version. For example, if a reboot into an older
  version of the operating system is performed, a configuration
  created in a later version cannot be restored.


2.5.6. Upgrading a ZFS Pool
---------------------------

In FreeNAS^®, ZFS pools can be upgraded from the graphical
administrative interface.

Before upgrading an existing ZFS pool, be aware of these caveats
first:

* the pool upgrade is a one-way street, meaning that **if you change
  your mind you cannot go back to an earlier ZFS version or downgrade
  to an earlier version of the software that does not support those
  ZFS features.**

* before performing any operation that may affect the data on a
  storage disk, **always back up all data first and verify the
  integrity of the backup.** While it is unlikely that the pool
  upgrade will affect the data, it is always better to be safe than
  sorry.

* upgrading a ZFS pool is **optional**. Do not upgrade the pool if the
  the possibility of reverting to an earlier version of FreeNAS^® or
  repurposing the disks in another operating system that supports ZFS
  is desired. It is not necessary to upgrade the pool unless the end
  user has a specific need for the newer ZFS Feature Flags. If a pool
  is upgraded to the latest feature flags, it will not be possible to
  import that pool into another operating system that does not yet
  support those feature flags.

To perform the ZFS pool upgrade, go to Storage ‣ Pools and click 
(Settings) to upgrade. Click the Upgrade Pool button as shown in
Figure %s.

Note:

  If the Upgrade Pool button does not appear, the pool is already at
  the latest feature flags and does not need to be upgraded.

   [image]Upgrading a Pool

The warning serves as a reminder that a pool upgrade is not
reversible. Click OK to proceed with the upgrade.

The upgrade itself only takes a few seconds and is non-disruptive. It
is not necessary to stop any sharing services to upgrade the pool.
However, it is best to upgrade when the pool is not being heavily
used. The upgrade process will suspend I/O for a short period, but is
nearly instantaneous on a quiet pool.


2.6. Virtualization
===================

FreeNAS^® can be run inside a virtual environment for development,
experimentation, and educational purposes. Note that running FreeNAS^®
in production as a virtual machine is not recommended. When using
FreeNAS^® within a virtual environment, read this post first as it
contains useful guidelines for minimizing the risk of losing data.

To install or run FreeNAS^® within a virtual environment, create a
virtual machine that meets these minimum requirements:

* **at least** 8192 MiB (8 GiB) base memory size

* a virtual disk **at least 8 GiB in size** to hold the operating
  system and boot environments

* at least one additional virtual disk **at least 4 GiB in size** to
  be used as data storage

* a bridged network adapter

This section demonstrates how to create and access a virtual machine
within VirtualBox and VMware ESXi environments.


2.6.1. VirtualBox
-----------------

VirtualBox is an open source virtualization program originally created
by Sun Microsystems. VirtualBox runs on Windows, BSD, Linux,
Macintosh, and OpenSolaris. It can be configured to use a downloaded
FreeNAS^® ".iso" file, and makes a good testing environment for
practicing configurations or learning how to use the features provided
by FreeNAS^®.

To create the virtual machine, start VirtualBox and click the New
button, shown in Figure %s, to start the new virtual machine wizard.

   [image]Initial VirtualBox Screen

Click the Next button to see the screen in Figure %s. Enter a name for
the virtual machine, click the Operating System drop-down menu and
select BSD, and select FreeBSD (64-bit) from the Version dropdown.

   [image]Enter Name and Operating System for the New Virtual Machine

Click Next to see the screen in Figure %s. The base memory size must
be changed to **at least 8192 MiB**. When finished, click Next to see
the screen in Figure %s.

   [image]Select the Amount of Memory Reserved for the Virtual Machine

   [image]Select Existing or Create a New Virtual Hard Drive

Click Create to launch the Create Virtual Hard Drive Wizard shown in
Figure %s.

   [image]Create New Virtual Hard Drive Wizard

Select VDI and click the Next button to see the screen in Figure %s.

   [image]Select Storage Type for Virtual Disk

Choose either Dynamically allocated or Fixed-size storage. The first
option uses disk space as needed until it reaches the maximum size
that is set in the next screen. The second option creates a disk the
full amount of disk space, whether it is used or not. Choose the first
option to conserve disk space; otherwise, choose the second option, as
it allows VirtualBox to run slightly faster. After selecting Next, the
screen in Figure %s is shown.

   [image]Select File Name and Size of Virtual Disk

This screen is used to set the size (or upper limit) of the virtual
disk. **Set the default size to a minimum of 8 GiB**. Use the folder
icon to browse to a directory on disk with sufficient space to hold
the virtual disk files.  Remember that there will be a system disk of
at least 8 GiB and at least one data storage disk of at least 4 GiB.

Use the Back button to return to a previous screen if any values need
to be modified. After making a selection and pressing Create, the new
VM is created. The new virtual machine is listed in the left frame, as
shown in the example in Figure %s. Open the Machine Tools drop-down
menu and select Details to see extra information about the VM.

   [image]The New Virtual Machine

Create the virtual disks to be used for storage. Highlight the VM and
click Settings to open the menu. Click the Storage option in the left
frame to access the storage screen seen in Figure %s.

   [image]Storage Settings of the Virtual Machine

Click the Add Attachment button, select Add Hard Disk from the pop-up
menu, then click the Create new disk button. This launches the Create
Virtual Hard Disk wizard seen in Figure %s and %s.

Create a disk large enough to hold the desired  data. The minimum size
is **4 GiB.** To practice with RAID configurations, create as many
virtual disks as needed. Two disks can be created on each IDE
controller. For additional disks, click the Add Controller button to
create another controller for attaching additional disks.

Create a device for the installation media. Highlight the word
"Empty", then click the CD icon as shown in Figure %s.

   [image]Configuring ISO Installation Media

Click Choose Virtual Optical Disk File... to browse to the location of
the ".iso" file. If the ".iso" was burned to CD, select the detected
Host Drive.

Depending on the extensions available in the host CPU, it might not be
possible to boot the VM from an ".iso". If "your CPU does not support
long mode" is shown when trying to boot the ".iso", the host CPU
either does not have the required extension or AMD-V/VT-x is disabled
in the system BIOS.

Note:

  If there is a kernel panic when booting into the ISO, stop the
  virtual machine. Then, go to System and check the box Enable IO
  APIC.

To configure the network adapter, go to Settings ‣ Network ‣ Adapter
1. In the Attached to drop-down menu select Bridged Adapter, then
choose the name of the physical interface from the Name drop-down
menu. In the example shown in Figure %s, the Intel Pro/1000 Ethernet
card is attached to the network and has a device name of *em0*.

   [image]Configuring a Bridged Adapter in VirtualBox

After configuration is complete, click the Start arrow and install
FreeNAS^® as described in Performing the Installation. After FreeNAS^®
is installed, press "F12" when the VM starts to boot to access the
boot menu. Select the primary hard disk as the boot option. You can
permanently boot from disk by removing the Optical device in Storage
or by unchecking Optical in the Boot Order section of System.


2.6.2. VMware ESXi
------------------

ESXi is a bare-metal hypervisor architecture created by VMware Inc.
Commercial and free versions of the VMware vSphere Hypervisor
operating system (ESXi) are available from the VMware website.

Install and use the VMware vSphere client to connect to the ESXi
server. Enter the username and password created when installing ESXi
to log in to the interface. After logging in, go to *Storage* to
upload the FreeNAS^® ".iso". Click Datastore browser and select a
datastore for the FreeNAS^® ".iso". Click Upload and choose the
FreeNAS^® ".iso" from the host system.

Click Create / Register VM to create a new VM. The *New virtual
machine* wizard opens:

1. **Select creation type**: Select "Create a new virtual machine" and
   click Next.

      [image]

2. **Select a name and guest OS**: Enter a name for the VM. Leave ESXi
   compatibility version at the default. Select "Other" as the Guest
   OS family. Select "FreeBSD12 or later versions (64-bit)" as the
   Guest OS version. Click Next.

      [image]

3. **Select storage**: Select a datastore for the VM. The datastore
   must be at least 32 GiB.

      [image]

4. **Customize settings**: Enter the recommended minimums of at least
   *8 GiB* of memory and *32 GiB* of storage. Select "Datastore ISO
   file" from the CD/DVD Drive 1 drop-down. Use the Datastore browser
   to select the uploaded FreeNAS^® ".iso". Click Next.

      [image]

5. **Ready to complete**: Review the VM settings. Click Finish to
   create the new VM.

      [image]

To add more disks to a VM, right-click the VM and click Edit Settings.

Click Add hard disk ‣ New standard hard disk. Enter the desired
capacity and click Save.

   [image]Adding a Storage Disk

Virtual HPET hardware can prevent the virtual machine from booting on
some older versions of VMware. If the virtual machine does not boot,
remove the virtual HPET hardware:

* On ESXi, right-click the VM and click Edit Settings. Click VM
  Options ‣ Advanced ‣ Edit Configuration.... Change hpet0.present
  from *TRUE* to *FALSE* and click OK. Click Save to save the new
  settings.

* On Workstation or Player, while in Edit Settings, click Options ‣
  Advanced ‣ File Locations. Locate the path for the Configuration
  file named "filename.vmx". Open the file in a text editor and change
  hpet0.present from *true* to *false*, then save the change.
