21. Log Out, Restart, or Shut Down
**********************************

The  (Power) button is used to log out of the web interface or
restart or shut down the FreeNAS^® system.


21.1. Log Out
=============

To log out, click  (Power), then Log Out. After logging out, the
login screen is displayed.


21.2. Restart
=============

To restart the system, click  (Power), then Restart. A confirmation
screen asks for verification of the restart. Figure %s. Click Confirm
to confirm the action, then click RESTART to restart the system.

   [image]Restart Warning Message

An additional warning message appears when a restart is attempted when
a scrub or resilver is in progress. When that warning appears, the
recommended steps are to CANCEL the restart request and to
periodically run **zpool status** from Shell until it shows that the
scrub or verify has completed. Then the restart request can be entered
again.

To complete the restart request, click the Confirm checkbox and then
the RESTART button. Restarting the system disconnects all clients,
including the web administration interface. Wait a few minutes for the
system to boot, then use the back button in the browser to return to
the IP address of the FreeNAS^® system. The login screen appears after
a successful reboot. If the login screen does not appear, using a
monitor and keyboard to physically access the FreeNAS^® system is
required to determine the issue preventing the system from resuming
normal operation.


21.3. Shut Down
===============

Click  (Power) and Shut Down to shut down the system. The warning
message shown in Figure %s is displayed.

   [image]Shut Down Warning Message

Click Confirm and then SHUT DOWN to shut down the system. Shutting
down the system disconnects all clients, including the web interface.
Physical access to the FreeNAS^® system is required to turn it back
on.
